The Project Gutenberg eBook of Songs of the Slav, by Otto Kotouč

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Songs of the Slav
       Translations from the Czecho-Slovak

Authors: Jan Kollár
         Vítězslav Hálek
         Svatopluk Čech
         Petr Bezruč

Translator: Otto Kotouč

Release Date: March 17, 2023 [eBook #70309]

Language: English

Produced by: Tim Lindell, David E. Brown, and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
             produced from images generously made available by The
             Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SONGS OF THE SLAV ***





  SONGS OF THE SLAV

  TRANSLATIONS FROM
  THE CZECHO-SLOVAK

  OTTO KOTOUČ

  [Illustration]

  BOSTON

  THE POET LORE COMPANY

  THE GORHAM PRESS




  COPYRIGHT, 1919, BY OTTO KOTOUČ

  All Rights Reserved

  Made in the United States of America

  The Gorham Press, Boston, U.S.A.




PREFACE


Although the Czecho-Slovaks have a great literature, particularly
rich in poetry, but very little has been introduced to the American
public. This has perhaps been due mainly to the fact that the Czechs
did not possess their independence and consequently were considered
an insignificant nation submerged within the shadows of the former
Austro-Hungarian empire. Since the World War has resulted in liberating
oppressed nationalities, and Czecho-Slovakia has again regained her
ancient independence, undoubtedly a greater opportunity will be offered
to learn more about the language and literature of that liberty loving
people.

As is usually the case with a nation held in subjugation, so with
the Czecho-Slovaks, their poets kept alive the national spirit until
their liberation. The purpose of this little volume is not only to
present a few specimens of Czecho-Slovak poetry, but also to show how
Czecho-Slovak poets kept the “fires of Liberty” burning, while awaiting
“dawn’s redemptory glow.” For, in the words of Jablonský,--

  “Ask thou what’s more beautiful,--
  Hither lay thy right hand:
  ’Tis the heart, beloved son,
  Beating for native land.”

Of the poets herein represented, Jan Kollár, the Slovak poet, is
known as the poet of Pan-Slavism. Vítězslav Hálek was the forerunner
of the modern school of poets, instilling idealism and enthusiasm
into the then newly resurrected national life. Svatopluk Čech has the
distinction of being the most popular of all the Czech poets. Petr
Bezruč, “first bard of Bezkyd, and the last,” is the Mountain Poet
of (Lower) Silesia. Blowing into a “dying flame,” he has kept alive
the Czech national spirit of that region against the combined efforts
of the Germans and the Poles. J. S. Machar is the leading poet of
Czecho-Slovakia in the present day.




CONTENTS


          JAN KOLLÁR                               PAGE

  THE DAUGHTER OF SLÁVA                               7


          VÍTĚZSLAV HÁLEK

  EVENING SONGS                                       9


          SVATOPLUK ČECH

  SONGS OF THE SLAVE                                 12


          PETR BEZRUČ

  ONE MELODY                                         27

  SILESIAN FORESTS                                   28

  A RED BLOSSOM                                      29

  YOU AND I                                          30

  70,000                                             31


           J. S. MACHAR

  ON GOLGOTHA                                        32

  A FANTASTIC BALLAD                                 38

  A SONNET OF THE PAST                               40

  A SONNET OF LIFE                                   41

  TO MY MOTHER                                       42

  THE SPIRAL, OR ON THE DECLINE OF A CENTURY         43




SONGS OF THE SLAV




THE DAUGHTER OF SLÁVA

JAN KOLLÁR


_Canto III. Sonnet 62_

  A hundred times I spoke, but now I call
  To you divided, O Slavonians!
  Let’s be a whole and not a part in clans;
  Be one in harmony or naught at all.

  A dove-like nation we in scorn are styled.
  But doves you know are come of such a stock
  That loves to live within a common flock,
  And so may you apply this trait reviled.

  O Slavs, thou race of many fragments!
  United forces e’er results will show,
  But waste and dry the circling currents.

  O Slavs, who are of many heads a race!
  The wise indeed a death no worse can know
  Than life that sloth, void, darkness doth embrace.


_Canto III. Sonnet 110_

  What will become of Slavs in hundred years?
  What will the whole of Europe come to be?
  Slav life, just as a mighty flow appears,
  Shall everywhere extend its boundary.

  That tongue, which German henchmen falsely low
  Proclaimed a tongue of slaves to all around,
  Shall ’neath our rival’s palace ceilings sound
  And even spoken be by lips of foe.

  Sciences shall likewise Slav channels see;
  Our people’s customs, dress and music will
  On both the Seine and Danube modish be.

  O would that I had rather been born when
  The Slavs shall rulers be! Or better still,
  I shall then rise up from my grave again.




EVENING SONGS

VÍTĚZSLAV HÁLEK


I

  “Unmeet it is for man to lack
  In song,” once God in judgment spake,
  Created man a poet then,
  And bade him this allotment take:

  “So long as thou liv’st know no peace,
  But only learn of pain instead;
  And disappointed too in hope,
  In tears eat thou thy daily bread.

  “Torn be thy heart and bled from wounds,
  But thyself only see thy bleeding;
  Though hounded over every bound,
  Love thou but all the more and sing.”

  It is us singers’ common lot,
  The world may only know our songs,
  To know what prompted us to sing,
  To none within this world belongs.


II

  O Lord, of every claim to gift
  I have, my soul here now I free;
  But leave to me the gift of song,
  That only do I beg of thee.

  If thou shouldst take my gift to sing,
  Naught longer then is life to me;
  And gav’st me Fortune for my song,
  I care not fortunate to be.


III

  Whoever plays with golden strings,
  Him honor more than thyself even;
  For know that God did love thee so,
  He needs must send him thee from heaven.

  ’Tis terrible when plague and want
  To God’s chastisement must belong;
  Of punishments the greatest though,
  Is when a nation lacks in song.

  That race indeed has yet to die,
  That had its prophets still to sing;
  And every song that’s born in heaven
  In even death new life doth bring.


IV

  Cast ye not stones at your prophets,
  For like the birds bards are alone:
  They never will return to him
  Who casts but once at them a stone.

  A nation seeks God’s punishment
  When unrevered its bards it wrongs;
  And direst is the curse of God,
  Whenever he withdraws his songs.

  A poet’s heart is truly pure,
  And likewise from all wrath apart,
  And from his heart whate’er he sings,
  That carry thou within thy heart.


V

  A hundred years passed ’ere I came
  Upon the grave that once was mine;
  The sexton sang my song and piled
  My bones with others in that shrine.

  “O sexton, find for me that heart
  From which you snatched the song you sing!”
  The sexton wondered long and sought,
  Save bones he could not find a thing.

  Then from his grave he rose and spake:
  “That, sir, with us no difference makes,
  Ten hearts can’st thou perchance possess,
  The grave wastes all of them it takes.”

  He finished digging, and I sighed:
  “O heart of mine, there thou didst end.”
  The sexton as consoling adds,
  “When hearts stop song, so all doth tend.”




SONGS OF THE SLAVE

SVATOPLUK ČECH


I

  _Slaves._--Good it is to rest the weary body in the light of the moon
  ’Neath the palms here. Feasting over, our custodian sleeps now;
  Sit down ’mongst us, tuneful comrade, and thy sweetly sounding strings
    tune;
  Let thy song reveal the golden thoughts spun in your dreamy brow.

  _A Slave Girl._--Sing of flowers and stars!

  _A Young Slave._--Praise sing thou to a maid’s fair form and eye.

  _Another._--Ring the bells of jest.

  _An Old Man._--Disclose the deeds of ages long gone by.

  _The Bard._--Other themes by far to-day resound through my unhappy
    soul,
  Like the roar and rumble of the storms that o’er the heavens roll.
  Far from these are flowery adornment, girlish grace, and heroes’
    pride:
  Sighs, groans, gnash of teeth and clash of chains now in my themes
    abide.

  _Slaves._--Clash of chains is but a common strain to us, yet play and
    sing;
  Subdue thy voice, lest our sleeping lords and guard the whip to you
    bring.


II

  Well then, burst through lips obstructing,
  Storms, that through my bosom roll,
  Thoughts, that flash like rays of lightning
  Through the darkness of my soul,
  Fire of Shame and Wrathful Teeming,
  Rouse my string from idle dreaming
  And its heavy swoon control!

  Hatched my songs not in a nest weighed
  With scented tresses softly pressed,
  Warmed them not the heart of maid
  Dreaming sweetly on my breast.
  Flashed were they through weary head
  When ’neath haughty blows of fists, red
  Flushed the cheek with blood compressed.

  Yea of blood and tears and gall,
  When times were bad, they were born;
  When I saw the tyrant install
  Tortures on my brothers forlorn;
  When I gnashed my teeth in vain
  As the brutal beadle in disdain
  Laughed at us suffering and worn.

  I know there’ll be no gratitude,
  I know many of you will say,
  In the tortured croaking rude
  There’s no art or beauty’s lay,
  Above troubled turmoil’s time
  Should the singer strive to climb,
  To the sunny height’s clear way.

  ’Tis the truth perhaps, but freely
  How may soar one to the sky,
  When on breast he feels painfully
  Heavy night’s hobgoblin lie?
  No other strain with me abides
  Until storm in soul subsides;
  Sing no other strain can I.


III

  Of a slave begot, gave
  Me birth likewise a slave;
  Childhood’s lullaby song
  Was but clash of chain,--
  Through my life extended
  Rusted shackles sounded
  Morn till nightfall along
  Life’s deserted main.

  Scarce felt my nape at length
  Youthful power and strength,
  Yoke of steel was firmly
  Bound about my neck:
  Taught to bow my head low,
  Kisses did I bestow
  On the lash that smote me:
  Brow beat earth at beck.

  I, a weakly slave, grew
  ’Mongst my brother serfs true;
  Chains for jewels clinked just
  At each sister’s side;
  And where’er my gaze dwelt
  Anger, shame, pain I felt,
  As with heads bowed to dust
  Slaves dwelt nation wide.

  Ill did I bear my fate--
  My bond’s music grate,
  Chasing from my cabin
  All the charm of life.
  When with stormy feeling
  I sought my lyre’s healing,
  In my song accursed, din
  Of my chains was rife.

  Still my eye would often beam
  With a flickering gleam:
  I would strain my ear past
  Woods and streams along:
  I deemed that yon somewhere
  Triumphs ’neath the heav’ns there,
  Flies our hollow at last,
  Freedom’s sunny song.

  When my head I would lift,
  Low again would it drift;
  On in shame and sorrow
  Years succession gave.
  Clings the yoke still to me
  And the eye waits vainly
  Dawn’s redemptory glow:
  I will die a slave.

  My head e’en now bends low,
  White locks my temples show;
  Hopes no longer attain
  Autumn’s riper hue,--
  Shackled my hands I know
  Curséd the yoke I’ll never o’erthrow,--
  In my grave shall that chain
  Rest beside me too.


XVI

  Oft here and there freedom is an empty name,
  And liberty a hollow, idle sound;
  Yet day by day ’mongst us feels this watchword same
  Each heart with stormy throb anew rebound;
  Where’er one’s gaze doth fall, ’tis writ in fire there,
  And round about eternally it peals;
  Each morn we breathe a sigh for this our first care,
  At night our final prayer with it deals.

  Whene’er the boundless sea draws us from afar,
  And free the wind doth toss our locks apart;
  Whene’er the steeds that roam the plain, know no bar,
  With flowing mane on the horizon start;
  Whene’er before our gaze proud soars the eagle
  And flaps his wings in bluey heights above:
  The fettered hand the while then shakes its shackle,
  And quivering the lips with “Freedom” move.

  O Freedom, like a wondrous myth art thou borne
  Enchantingly to us from times now wan:
  Dim as an echo of paradise forlorn
  That sleeps concealed within the heart of man.
  Our spirit grown with chains in one scarce trusts too
  That more than rumors could these tidings be,
  That what in yonder distance dawns was true,
  That we were once a nation of the free.

  Thou didst appear within the tales of childlore
  A shining fairy with a star above
  Whene’er the grandsire read chronicles of yore;
  Wast thou and thou alone youth’s own true love,
  Thy sunny gaze did ever before him beam,
  And dreams of thee his martial moments filled;
  For thee his shining sword he drew in dream,
  In dream his warmest blood for thee he spilled.

  In slav’ry’s night wast thou a star to man,
  Though far, though unattainable, alas!
  ’Twas thou that through his thoughts forever ran,
  The goal of all his hopes to thee did pass;
  And as a promised land beckst thou afar
  The head that’s gray, when wrapped o’er chains in dream;
  And e’en on dying eyes earth’s last rays are
  United with thee in a twinkling gleam.

  O Freedom, let be that with lapse of time came
  Thy name to lose its tone, once pure a part;
  Let greedy egoists desecrate thy name
  Who must suspend thy emblem in their mart;
  Let be that slanderers of true liberty
  Weave thee upon their flag in false acclaim;
  And those who at length escape the yoke, wildly
  Then throttle other nations in thy name:

  To hold thee ever pure in our hearts we seek,
  Taught constantly thy fuller worth to know
  Through rain of blows, the sting on the sunken cheek,
  And rapacious hands that grasp all from us so.
  The blows that day by day are dealt with lash,
  The thorns that daily pierce our brow,--all see
  Each after each through the soul thy image flash,
  And from the depths the sigh wells, “Liberty.”

  O Freedom, daily, thy opposite beneath,
  We learn thy full and lustrous charm to admire,
  In that hollow moan, in the gnash of teeth
  With which we gnaw our bit our life entire.
  When foreign heel can trample our nape in dust
  And every comer scorn and torture deals,
  The lips are closed ’neath hangman’s lash unjust,
  Though through the heart storm’s longing, “Freedom,” peals!


XVII

  When dark above the earth the piling clouds clash
  Like raging hosts of Satan in array,
  Their shields with thunder peal and fiery swords flash,
  Then forth on high my fettered hands I lay:

  Rise up, O Storm, in all your horror and might,
  The elements’ eternal rage awake!
  Let earth be tumbled down in ruin, fire, night;
  The sea and rivers’ floods the lowlands take!

  Whate’er our master’s is, destroy speedily,
  Tear soil with waves, the meads to wastes condemn,
  Shake blossom from its branch and fruit from palm tree,
  Break, fell, disroot with might each graceful stem!

  Burst high his golden dome with muffled pealings,
  Consume the master’s stately home with fire,
  With raining gravel of his marble ceilings
  Crush low the tyrant and his hosts of hire!

  May foe with wrathful elements too unite,
  And round with steel and fire-brand rage and rend,
  Let be who will, success attend still his fight:
  Our lord’s assassin then will be our friend!


XVIII

  Our master too designed for us our god,
      And even bids us to believe
  That god had placed within his hands the rod,
      Our arms within their bonds did leave.
      Abase yourselves, O bow yourselves,
      Before the Lord of starry dome!
      Abase yourselves, O bow yourselves,
      Before the lord of earthly home!
      Humility, obedience,
      Alone heaven’s gates will open;
      And for the master reverence,
      Is the soul’s most precious token.

  Humanity’s noblest feeling, perchance,
      Is thus within the slaver’s grace;
  Within his God’s eternal countenance
      Is carved his domineering face.
      His priests too in adulation
      With stooping backs his praises say
      In song and in emulation.
      They are the pillar of his sway:
      Upon each head destruction send
      That will but raise itself more free,
      And his success with prayers attend,
      And bless his rod in piety.

  The lips of a pious prophet once taught
      Equality of all men,
  And shattering the chains of a slave sought
      To bind all with love’s bonds then.
      But his disciple’s cunning clan
      Upset his laws and his command,
      Extols to us the sacred plan,
      Although coerced its legal stand,
      Rejoices with its filthy gain
      Along with friendly lord’s acclaim,
      And so it consecrates the chain,
      Mockingly, in the Master’s name.

  O God of ours, Thou our true God, give heed!
      Thou God of slaves that are poor,
  Who decks His altars not with gold indeed,
      Nor priests in silken vesture;
      Who reigns in nature’s own beauty
      And in the heart-throbs of the simple,
      Thou, O great God of Liberty,
      Lift up Thy hand so powerful,
      Release us from our ancient shackles,
      Raise high our heads up from the dust,
      And to the world in Freedom’s temples,
      Proclaim Thy laws so true and just!


XXIII

  I stand at dusk upon a cliff, ’gainst which mid rumble of rain
  And smoke is dashed in roaring spray the water’s vast hurricane.
  Just as a bird that seeks in vain for rest the isle’s seclusion,
  My gaze dips gloomily in mists, of clouds and waves confusion
  Which dark extends ahead into unbounded space and which teems
  Belike a witches’ caldron with waterspouts and seething streams.

  As here I stand and backward gaze, in slav’ry groans the land there;
  I gaze ahead, there the threatening elements mad strife prepare.
  A tempest wild draws nigh; e’en now blows the wind my locks about,
  While the voices of the storm my chain’s eternal clash o’ershout.
  But I those fettered hands forth to the coming deluge extend,
  And my cheeks, like maids on kisses bent, to the lashing winds I lend:
  Welcome, storm. Your ghastly sight but promises redemption only,
  And in your rumble and roar, ’tis freedom’s song saluting me.

  And now suddenly a sparkling mist begins to fill my eyes;
  I feel how my throbbing temples burn with sudden fire; how rise
  From my bosom to my trembling lips fantastic murmurings,
  And how my soul soars to future realms on thought’s prophetic wings.
  There’s a twinkling, glimmering, dawn, beyond that mass of clouds and
    spray,
  Just as if through them were breaking forth the heavy birth of day.
  The angry sea clothes itself in a ruddy, weirdly beauteous glow,
  As if in the broad water’s stead blood and only blood did flow.
  The lengthy crests of monstrous waves, rain dashed into spray anew,
  Raging waterspouts and bursting clouds,--all are a bloody hue;
  And crash and din deafen the ear, as when in the battle’s fray
  Clash countless spears and lances of raving armies without array.
  But anon the drumming of the storm grows still, the seething ceases,
  The sun’s golden shield, peeping from the rosy vapors, increases.
  Victorious day rends the clouds and mists in flowing tatters,
  Just as in flying fringe are torn the battle-worn banners.
  The scattered hosts of darkness flee; silent grows the stormy scene;
  Blue is the sky, blue is the sea, gold the atmosphere between.

  But what do I behold? A new strand there. The sun’s smiling form
  Of coming years illumines another world reborn from the storm.
  And yon palm’s gorgeous growth of green, glistening with fruit of
    gold,
  Surveys its pleasing charms in the deep blue water’s peaceful fold.
  The country round with ’bundance beams--blossom, grain and grape of
    vine;
  And there in gratitude urgent work and merry song combine.
  All hands are free from fetters, pleasant is the laborer’s brow,
  Nowhere custodian with whip, nor sleek the slaveholder now;
  Nowhere glistens the savage soldier’s lance and spear, nor appear
  The white folds of the Brahman’s robe hypocritically near;
  Nowhere is writ in colors diverse the mark of caste,
  ’Tis the happy native land of brothers equal and free at last.

  Peacefully in those throngs are mingled diverse speech and color,
  The beggar does not wind in rags, nor wastes his wealth the idler;
  Gone are the wretched huts, tidy homes though plain are everywhere;
  And where a stately palace proudly towers to the skies, not there
  Is a haughty egoist’s abode, opens wide its gates to all;
  The people’s parliament deliberates free their rise and fall;
  From there the glow of knowledge spreads about a benevolent light,
  Ennobling the human feelings, there in art soul finds delight.--
  The clash of chains has wakened me, the beautiful dream is effaced,
  So sadly interchanged, by the present shame and woe replaced.--

  But no! ’Twas not a mere illusion of my o’er-yearning dream.
  I know that the morning star of those better days will yet gleam;
  That the greater part of that vision’s splendor will be fulfilled,
  Though from my aged neck to shake the yoke, I shall not be willed.
  My silvery gray head will bow unto the dust of a slave;
  Slaves too will cast the handful of earth to my fetters in my grave.
  But, you, O younger comrades, ere your course shall know time no more,
  You shall ascend with happy tread upon freedom’s sunny shore.
  Then may the rude fist with whip around about in darkness reign.
  But let each cherish faithfully for the future that blessed refrain;
  Let all minds be united by the bond of our great endeavor,
  And till time bids thee to action, gather your forces together;
  All peoples free shall fraternize, the bonds of slaves will fall,
  And our flag too, O brothers, will wave in the clear heights o’er all.




ONE MELODY

PETR BEZRUČ


  Bad verse at times I write, I know,
  I’m read but little luckily,
  Into a dying flame I blow,
  Though laughs at me nobility.

  At times a silent song I sing.
  If bad the note, forgive me, pray,
  A miner black to work I cling
  From Saturday to Saturday.

  In stormy times, when roaring sounds
  The jam of thought and fantasy,
  In dismal monotone abounds
  For me the selfsame melody.

  On my people’s nape’s one dragon ill,
  One fist about their throat is twirled;
  And from my verses one dactyl,
  One sorrow stares into the world.




SILESIAN FORESTS


  Thou art as I, Silesian Forests!
  Sorrow clings to thy trunks and crests;
  You look depressed and you look severe,
  Just as my thoughts and my songs appear.
  Spine falls from thee in the night and the mist,
  Tears of a race in subjection list.

  Fallen art thou by the ax at Vienna’s wish,
  Slowly you perish, peacefully you perish,
  Silently perish, thou pine forest sea,
  Endless, Silesian sorrows are ye.




A RED BLOSSOM


  In a dark window, in a gray flower-pot,
  Frowned a rough and thorny cactus.
  Once on a morning
  Red was the chalice that burst from the stalk,
  Red was the blossom.
  Came to us once a poet whose view differed,
  Who adored fragrant and gorgeous roses.
  In sounding distichs
  Praised the rose and proudly censured
  That ruddy blossom.
  There are rough souls that have trod life’s path alone,
  Thorns and prickles enveloped them entire.
  What did their hearts hold?
  Bloomed they but once and bloomed they at night, look!
  Red was the blossom.




YOU AND I


  Out of my way now:
  Black are my hands and damp is my clothing.
  Only a miner am I, to-day noble thou;
  Thou’rt from a palace, a hut is my dwelling.
  Frigid’s the cap I wear, with a visor on,
  Orphans’ lamenting prayers do not follow me;
  Eaten up fields for them have hares of thine.
  Heartless and soulless thou’rt, lightning smite thee!
  I am from Bezkyd, thralldom and sorrow’s son.
  I slave in foundery, I slave in thy mine,
  Gall seethes in my veins, but still I slave,
  I catch thy logs on the foaming river’s wave.
  Black am I, poor am I, sweat pours from my brow,
  Children in Bezkyd weep not on my account now.
  Widows oppressed I not, nor did I seize their share,
  And so a beggar am I, a noble thou to-day.
  Did you arrive in the mountains? Then take care.
  Frigid’s my cap. Get thee out of my way.




70,000


  There’re seventy thousand of us
  Before Těšín, before Těšín.
  A hundred thousand Germanized,
  A hundred thousand Polanized,
  A holy peace rests in my heart.
  When we remain but seventy,
  Of thousands only seventy,
  May we live?

  They’re digging seventy thousand
  Graves for us all before Těšín.
  At times some one sobs to the space
  Above. His plea remains unfilled:
  A foreign god laughs in his face.
  And bluntly we gaze in a flock
  How they place our heads upon the block,
  As ox at slaughter of an ox.

  And marquis Gero is so rich:
  Give casks to us for seventy,
  Give casks for thousands seventy.
  A half of us will Germanize,
  A half of us will Polanize,
  A hundred lips will peal for thee:
  Hail, marquis Gero, hail to thee!
  But first before we perish thus,
  May ruddy wine intoxicate us,
  Bond-woman, daughter, man and son,
  Before Těšín, before Těšín.




ON GOLGOTHA

J. S. MACHAR


  It was the third hour when the cross was raised
  Betwixt the crosses.
                             Red from exertion
  The soldiers sat upon the much trampled
  And bloody ground. They parted His raiment.
  And for the coat which was without seam they
  Cast lots.
            And many of the multitude
  Passed gazing up at Him and wagged their heads
  And said, Ah, come down from the cross! For Thou
  Didst style Thyself king! Thou, that wouldst destroy
  The temple and then build it in three days
  Well, save Thyself!
                     Stood by also chief priests
  And scribes with long and flowing beards, and said
  Amongst themselves: True, true, He saved others;
  Let Him then save Himself now.--There also
  Were many women looking on afar,
  Who ministered to Him in Galilee,
  Salome, Mary, and Magdalene, and who
  Came up with Him unto Jerusalem.

  Crucified, naked, shorn, He was numbered
  With transgressors. And crusted blood clung to
  His scourged body, while ruddy streams oozed from
  His hands and feet and dripped upon the ground.
  His dying eyes gazed out into distance,
  Across the white city, hills and woodlands,
  And ridges of the peaceful peaks in whose
  Lap lie the blue waters of Galilee.

  He bowed His head.

                    A winged rustling reached
  His ear. ’Twas not the Father’s angel with
  Refreshment’s chalice for a weary soul--
  An unclean spirit with its batlike wings
  Outstretched upon the air flew unto Him.
  He had to suffer Satan to sit on
  His cross, lean toward His head. For faint within
  Him was His spirit and weak to resist.

  And Satan then said: Woeful Sufferer,
  Upon Thy cross of wood we meet again!
  To-day the last time. ’Tis settled to-day.
  The battle has been fought.

                             Rememberest Thou
  Three years hence, when I carried Thee yon in
  The wilderness upon a high mountain
  And shewed Thee mighty kingdoms, promised Thee
  All of the glory of this world, shouldst Thou
  Fall down and worship me? Thou didst refuse.
  Thou wouldst proclaim the coming kingdom of
  Heaven to the weak, wretched. Thou wouldst bestow
  Imperishable gifts upon clean hearts.
  Thou wouldst show humble souls the way into
  Thy Father’s glory and erase the curse
  Of Adam from each generation’s brow!

  Thou didst go to Thy death quiet, resigned,
  Just as the lamb that openest not its mouth.
  Thou pourest out Thy blood even like the dew
  To moisten Thy young and early sprouting seed.

  Jesus of Nazareth, behold the throngs
  That surge continually about Thy cross!
  Not long ago, when Thou didst enter in
  The city in triumph, they strewed palms ’neath
  Thy colt, cried praises unto Thee, and then
  Proclaimed Thee David’s son. For they thought ’mongst
  Themselves the kingdom of God was at hand,
  The cherished time of milk and honey was
  Now come. And then Thou didst refuse again.
  The disappointed throngs next in anger
  Cried, “Crucify Him!” into Pilate’s ears.
  And now they come and wag their heads and say:
  Here the king of the Jews is crucified.
  Let Him save Himself. He would be the Son
  Of God. But God seems to forsake Him now.

  And God forsook.

                  Behold that heaven where Thou
  Didst deem He reigns in all of His glory!
  Cloudless, serene, it smiles quietly on
  With its insensible blue smile. As ’twas
  Before, so ’twill be after Thee. So too
  The fowls flying the air and every beast
  Inhabiting the earth has lived and lives
  According to one law, that is my law.
  The strong forever shall absorb the weak.
  ’Tis so with man. And this whole wide, wide world
  Is my kingdom. Because I am the Life.
  I rule. I sit enthroned in hearts, in souls.
  No one shall ever banish me, nor Thou,
  Nor Thy Father. Thy kingdom of God is
  A dream. That dream I leave to man for e’er!

  Behold, how calmly Rome’s centurion
  Speaks with the scribe in white beneath Thy cross!
  ’Twill ever be thus. They are now heirs of
  Thy words, Thy dreams. One shall change his idols,
  The other his Jehovah for Thy name,
  And on the world shall live as I ordain.

  Why didst Thou not then take all those kingdoms
  And this world’s glory from my gen’rous hand?
  Thy youthful life would not have thus been spent
  In shameful torture. Happily couldst Thou
  Have lived and brought millions Thy happiness.
  But what bring’st Thou? Death and discord Thou spreadst.
  Thou fallest first. And for Thy name, Thy dreams,
  Hundreds upon hundreds shall spill their blood
  On crosses and arenas and scaffolds.
  And when ’twill seem Thy dream has been fulfilled,
  Then in Thy name, and only in Thy name,
  The carnage shall go on. So far as eye
  Can see, there rows of flaming pyres extend
  Where sacrifices are burned in Thy name;
  And in Thy name numberless wars shall rage,
  And in Thy name cities and towns shall burn,
  And in Thy name countries shall be laid waste,
  And in Thy name curses shall be uttered,
  And in Thy name there shall be slavery
  Of body and of spirit.

                                 For behold
  The centurion and the scribe! The one
  Shall murder in Thy name, the other bless
  Him in Thy name. Wretched millions shall pay
  For Thy dream with their most precious estate,
  Their lives.

         And o’er the blood that is thus spilled
  Thy dream of God’s eternal kingdom and
  Heaven’s glory shall rise up like a phantom
  That shall reward the dead. A lure to them
  In life thruout and on till ends the world!
  Why then didst Thou not take all those kingdoms
  And glory of this world? For life is mine.
  I am the life, the lord of all below.
  And forever I sit in hearts, in souls!...

  And then forthwith Satan arose and spread
  His great, dark, batlike wings, that extended
  With swiftness of the wind in distance vast
  And ghastly great. O’er Golgotha entire,
  O’er city and valley and o’er the hills,
  O’er regions round about, o’er distant peaks,
  O’er waters blue of lakes of Galilee,
  O’er realms beyond afar and seas remote,
  There was projected then a dark, black veil.

  And there was darkness over all the land,
  Which trembled then.

                    And in the end Jesus
  About Him gazed and with a loud voice cried:
  Elói, Elói, lama Sabachtani,
  And yielded up the ghost....




A FANTASTIC BALLAD


  Its first night now away from wealth’s gleam,
  The graceful form of that proud belle,
  Cold, ’neath its flowery mound, in deep dream,
  Within its casket there did dwell.

  And weird the moon from heights above viewed
  The night, by breath of fragrant bowers
  Made tremulous; the light, livid-hued,
  Slept soft on grave and cross and flowers.

  When suddenly upon that mound--lo!
  The buds upon each twig and shoot
  Began to burst, and each flower tapped slow
  Upon the casket with its root.

  “Admit me now to that fair cheek,” spake
  The rose, “to drink a bit of blood,
  My bud begins to ope; for its sake
  I seek to have her color’s flood.”

  The violet whisp’rs low in the gloom:
  “My root shall pierce her eyes of blue,
  There shall the hue be drawn for their bloom,
  Since bursts my throng of buds now too!”

  “And I,” the tender lily speaks, “want
  My flowers that precious gloss to own
  That ’dorns her breast of snow. Pray, recant,
  O Casket! Hear the plaint I moan!”

  “The lips purple!” the peony cries;
  The rosemary, “The hair’s sweet scent.”
  “O casket, grant our prayers. Sudden rise
  Our throngs of flowers in bloom. Relent!

  “To let this belle thus fade in her tomb,
  In blinding night--a sin at best.
  We’ll lift her to the sun, and she’ll loom
  Aloft upon each gayest crest!”

  And with a sinister chuckle, slow
  The hemlock rose--before all hid:
  “I seek the heart. Didst ye forget? Ho!
  The poison for my flowers I bid.”




A SONNET OF THE PAST


  You sigh as backward gazest thou:
  Ah, after all times then were best.
  But, my dear friend, be not depressed,
  You said it then as say you now.

  And in that “then” not otherwise,
  You longed for only what was past.
  Thus further back you will surmise,
  Till reach you swaddling clothes at last.

  And in those clothes perhaps you’d prate,
  Couldst thou but speak or meditate,
  Oh, but times then were better still.

  ’Tis fate’s old witticism ill.
  So, it may be a better fate
  When hearts will cease to meditate.




A SONNET OF LIFE


  How strange and feverish the haste appears,
  With which our modern living flies.
  Gaze back adown the row of bygone years
  And you begin to feel a longing rise.

  As if you rode a train that could not stop
  Or knew not whither it was rushing thee.
  As regions pass thee by, perchance you’d stop,
  But then a stop impossible would be.

  A few friends now ride in the car with you,
  A few fleet girlish glances you behold,
  They leave as others then in turn will do.

  At length thou’rt weary,--all a sameness takes,
  You feel the heart is quickly growing old
  And fills with longing when remembrance wakes.




TO MY MOTHER


  My mother, aft long rows of years I plant
  To-day a sonnet ’neath thy name of gold.
  Only a sonnet where hymn I should chant,
  But verses, where should sacred prayers be told.

  Ah, one must tread adown the path of woe
  And bury much in many storm accursed,
  Curse all that once he would have fondled so,
  Despair, and oftentimes in weeping burst.

  Then ridicule he must cynically
  That frivolous, yet frightful song of life,
  To accent the word “mother” properly.

  And loathsome must that song to him remain,
  To say he hears forever in the strife
  That “mother” sound as a sacred refrain.




THE SPIRAL

OR

ON THE DECLINE OF A CENTURY

_A spiral is a regular endless curve beginning at the center and
running in diverging rings continually in a circle so that the distance
of a point on any one revolution from the second is as great as the
second from the third and so on.--A Definition of a Spiral._


  It was ages ago.
  ’Twas the moment perhaps
  That Darwin describes:
  White was the beast
  That suddenly raised
  Her head on high,
  Stood firm upon
  Her hind feet
  Gazed up above
  To the shining ball
  In its vault of blue,
  Gazed all around
  On luxuriant earth,
  On the fruits thereof
  And all its creatures.
  A mighty feeling
  Of dominion and strength
  Stirred her to the depths.
  And from her breast
  First welled the joyous,
  Broad, powerful,
  Victorious: I,
  Which seemed to her
  The final center
  Of things all around.--
  And from the white beast
  At that time arose man.

  And life began.

  The embittered power
  Of afflictions and pains
  (Which unbeknown
  Each “I” enclosed
  As a soul within)
  Drove them on and on.
  Life fled before it
  As flees the hare
  From the light weasel
  Which sits at its throat.
  From a small point
  Life flew in a curve
  Of broad expanse.
  The curve unwinds,
  Unwinds and unwinds
  In a whirling spiral
  Along which man rushes,
  Impelled by pain
  And strengthened by hope
  Of peace and brighter aims.
  And the spiral spreads
  Through space without bounds,
  Without depth and height,
  Without breadth and length,
  On into the unknown.

  The embittered power
  Of afflictions and pains
  Impels it onward.
  It crumbled souls,
  Created gods,
  Crushed masses,
  Established kings,
  Impressed the steel
  Into the hands of man
  Which he in turn
  Plunged into himself;
  Led spirits into
  Sciences’ labyrinth
  And to streams of art,
  But nowhere to fortune.

  Mankind rushes along
  The whirling spiral
  Through space without bounds,
  Without depth and height,
  Without breadth and length,
  On into the unknown.

  Counseling gods,
  That gave not fortune,
  Overturned thrones,
  That gave not fortune,
  Blood that was shed
  And brought not fortune,
  Sciences and arts
  Where man found not fortune,
  All lies casts aside
  Along life’s frightful way.

  A monster huge
  Of bluish color,
  And called the past,
  Creeps aft mankind,
  Devours it all
  With mighty jaws,
  And, insatiable,
  Grows day by day.

  Mankind rushes on
  And ever onward.
  And again new gods,
  And new kings,
  And new battles,
  And new arts,
  And new sciences,--
  And again all lies
  Behind him far
  In the spiral’s path
  As the monster’s prey.

  And the spiral spreads and spreads
  Through endless space.
  And wretched mankind
  Thus chases fortune.
  Joyful cries at times
  Sound from a hundred throats.
  And strained nerves
  Tremble with bliss.
  Wretched mankind!
  Some sort of phantom,
  Fata morgana,
  Glittered somewhere for thee
  In the boundless desert!

  Wretched mankind!
  The following hour
  Again art thou further on,
  Ahasuerus of thy fable,
  In thy flight!
  And the deceitful phantom
  Will find itself in the jaws
  Of the bluish past,
  As all things else!

  And the spiral spreads and spreads.
  The nineteenth circle,
  Which we call enlightened,
  Runs into the twentieth.
  ’Tis an age of steam,
  Chemistry and physics,
  And a god grown old,
  And several kings,
  And rows of fine battles,
  And full of knowledge,
  And nerves unstrung,
  And of vain hopes,
  And full of misfortune
  As all the rest.

  The embittered power
  Of afflictions and pains
  Drives us from it
  Onward and onward
  Along the whirling spiral.

  That bluish past
  With gigantic jaws,
  With a great belly,
  Follows in our footsteps.
  It will at least find
  A profitable spoil.




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:


  Italicized text is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.

  Archaic or variant spelling has been retained.

  The cover image for this eBook was created by the transcriber and is
    entered into the public domain.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SONGS OF THE SLAV ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.”

• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
  works.

• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you “AS-IS”, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™'s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
